--------0--------
Since then, output has risen at an average rate of 3% a year and inflation has fallen from almost 5% to below 3% a year.
The largest change was to cyclical social security spending, which was revised down by £1 billion for 1997/98 in the Pre-Budget Report, reflecting the fall in unemployment since July.
The preliminary estimate of real GDP in 1997 Q4 was 0.5% higher than the previous quarter and 3.1% higher than a year earlier, significantly below the growth rate in the MPC’s forecast in November (see Chart 2.9).
These data were published after the preliminary GDP estimate.
Real GDP grew by 3.3% in 1997, the sixth year of expansion in the United Kingdom.
Revisions to real GDP data for 1997 Q3 and the preliminary estimate of output growth for 1997 Q4 suggest that the pace of economic activity slowed more rapidly in the second half of 1997 than expected at the time of the November Report.
Average earnings growth was 43/4% in the twelve months to November, having risen by a 1/4 percentage point in both October and November.
At 6.6% of the workforce, it was 1.3 percentage points lower than the previous year and at its lowest rate since the Survey began in 1984.
Longer-term inflation expectations can also be gleaned from the biannual survey of forecasts by Consensus Economics, which indicates that the average rate of inflation expected in the next five years fell between the first and second half of 1997.
The Pre-Budget Report on 25 November revised down the 1997/98 PSBR forecast by £1.4 billion to £11.9 billion (£9.5 billion when the windfall tax and associated spending are included).
The Government announced in January this year that workers covered by public sector pay review bodies would receive an average 3.9% pay increase in 1998, around 1/2 percentage point higher than in 1997.
The prices of imported goods in the three months to November were around 6% lower than in the same period a year earlier.
On 4 February, the date on which data for this Report were finalised, the oil price had risen slightly to £9.10 per barrel, around 20% lower than at the time of the previous Report.
Though most of this fall occurred at the start of 1997, all of the sub-components fell in November and December.
This was much higher than in the previous three months (when it was around its neutral level of 50), but about the same as in the summer.
Annual output price inflation has been below 11/2% since the start of 1997, only the third time it has been this low since the series began in 1963 (see Chart 4.3).
Since the start of 1995, annual RPIX inflation has averaged 2.8%, and has never been more than 1/2 percentage point away from its average rate.
Annual RPIX inflation in 1997 Q4 was slightly higher than expected in the November Report central projection.
And the outturn for RPIX inflation in 1997 Q4 was much higher than envisaged a year ago, in the February 1997 Report, when the central projection was around 21/4%.
RPIX annual inflation was 2.7% in December, compared with the target of 21/2% set for the MPC by the Government.
As a result, the current projection embodies a slightly higher profile for inflation in the next two years, relative to that in the November Report.
Stocks, excluding the alignment adjustment, reduced GDP growth by 0.5 percentage points in 1997 Q3, having reduced growth by 0.2 percentage points in the previous quarter.
This may have reduced consumption growth by as much as 0.5 percentage points in the quarter.
The twelve-month growth rate of credit in December was 8.6%, compared with an average annual growth rate of 9.1% in the first half of 1997.
OFIs’ bank borrowing outstanding was 20.8% higher in 1997 Q4 than a year earlier, compared with 19.6% in 1997 Q3.
The nominal yield on ten-year gilts fell by a further 50 basis points between the November and February Reports, continuing a two-year downward trend, and is now around 6.1%.
Real UK interest rates fell sharply in mid October and again in December, ending the year at around 3%.
The nominal effective exchange rate used as the starting-point in the inflation projection—based on its average in the 15 working days to 4 February—was 104.9.
This was 2.8% higher than the exchange rate used in the November Report.
The central projection is consistent with a bilateralexchange rate, two years hence, of 1.62 and 2.86 vis à vis the US dollar and the Deutsche Mark respectively.
The nominal effective exchange rate used as the starting-point in the inflation forecast, based on the average in the 15 working days to 4 February, was 104.9—some 2.8% higher than that used as the starting-point in the November Report.
This was 0.8 percentage points higher than the rise in the Halifax index, but 3.1 percentage points lower than the Nationwide index, taking account of timing differences between the indices.
Growth was fastest during the first half of the year; it slowed during the second half of the year, leaving the estimated level of GDP below that expected by the MPC at the time of the November Report.
The picture in Japan was much weaker: domestic demand fell by 0.4% in the year to 1997 Q3, and GDP grew by 1% in the same period.
Excluding oil and erratics, trade in goods and services made negative contributions, of 0.5 percentage points and 0.2 percentage points respectively, to GDP in 1997 Q3.
But the non-EU trade deficit for 1997 Q4 was £3.1 billion, £1.7 billion higher than in the previous quarter.
Net private capital inflows to Asia(1) were running at record levels in 1996, totalling around US $115 billion, compared with around US $19 billion in 1992.
The currencies of the ASEAN-4 fell by 20%–40% between January 1997 and the end of October against the US dollar, and the Korean won fell by around 15% during this period.
In Brazil, equity prices fell by around 40% between the last week in October and mid November, though the index was still around 45% higher in domestic currency terms at the end of 1997 than at the start of the year.
But growth remains considerably stronger than during the global slowdown in 1990–93, when output was rising at an annual rate of around 13/4%–23/4%.
UK growth has been revised down slightly in all the forecasts.
The US economy grew more rapidly in 1997 than in the previous year, and the preliminary estimates for the year to 1997 Q4 were strong: domestic demand and GDP grew by 4.3% and 3.9% respectively.
HICP annual inflation fluctuated between 11/2%–2% throughout 1997, about 3/4 percentage point lower than RPIX inflation during that period (because of differences in the coverage and construction of the indices).
The minutes of the November, December and January MPC meetings are attached as an Annex to this Report.
At the time of the November Report, the MPC concluded that inflation and output growth had both turned out higher than projected.
(1) It is shown next to the November projection (see Chart 6.3).
The most likely path for RPIX inflation is to fall slightly over the next year or so, before rising to just above 21/2% by the end of the forecast horizon.
The central projection for RPIX inflation at the two-year forecasting horizon is a little higher than in November.
As a result, and notwithstanding the lower level of output, the current projection embodies a slightly higher profile for inflation in the next two years, relative to that in the November Report.
The inflation projection charts are complemented by Charts 6.4 and 6.5.
These are produced from the same distributions as the inflation fan charts, and highlight the overall balance of risks at the end of the forecast period.
Table 6.A shows the probabilities of inflation turning out to be above or below the target, compared with similar estimates made by outside forecasters (described in Section 6.3).
This alternative assumption gives rise to a stronger profile for demand and output, and consequently a higher central projection for inflation at the two-year horizon.
The MPC’s projection of the twelve-month RPIX inflation rate is shown in Chart 6.2.
To assist comparisons, some changes have been made to the Bank’s survey of other forecasts to align the findings more closely with the MPC’s projections.
Chart 6.8 shows the distribution of central forecasts for twelve-month RPIX inflation in 2000 Q1.
The median expectation is around 2.5%, which is in line with the inflation target.
Overall, outside forecasters assign a 50% probability to inflation being above the target in the first quarter of 2000, and a 50% probability to it being below.
These figures are slightly different from the MPC’s projections, summarised in Table 6.A, which attach a somewhat higher probability to inflation being above 21/2% than below.
For the first time, other forecasters have provided the Bank with their assessment of the prospects for output.
Their average central projection for GDP growth in the year to 1998 Q4 is for growth of around 13/4%, rising to 21/4% in the year to 1999 Q4.
These figures are similar to the MPC’s central projection during the next two years.
The forecasters’ distribution of possible outcomes for GDP growth in 1998 and 1999 (see Table 6.C) shows a broadly symmetrical distribution.
Hence, the focus is on projections for 2000 Q1, as this is the end of the MPC’s forecast period.
And as the annual rate of output growth is projected to continue falling over the next few quarters, productivity growth is also likely to fall.
Despite the sharp, and largely unanticipated, appreciation of sterling, RPIX inflation has remained at, or above, the inflation target of 21/2%.
RPIX inflation fell slightly in December, but was above the November Report central projection.
For those reasons, the Committee decided in November to raise interest rates by 1/4 percentage point.
The first estimate for UK consumption growth in Q3 was below the central projection in the November Report.
At its meeting on 7–8 January, the MPC considered the revisions to GDP (see Table 5.A).
Output growth in Q3 had been revised down to 0.8%, compared with the 1.0% figure published prior to the release of the November Report.
The central projection in that Report had been for further strong growth in the fourth quarter before a marked slowdown to below trend in 1998 Q1.
First, it seemed likely that the relationship between output growth and inflation during the next two years would be less favourable than had been assumed in the November projection.
At the time of the February MPC meeting, the first estimate of GDP growth in the fourth quarter showed a rise of only 0.5%.
This was substantially weaker than expected at the time of the November Report.
Whole-economy underlying average earnings growth had picked up to 43/4% in November.
The increase was broadly in line with that expected at the time of the November Report.
RPIX inflation in December was higher than anticipated.
A key feature of the projections in the November Report was the marked slowdown in GDP growth.
The sterling effective exchange rate index averaged 104.9 in the 15 working days up to 4 February, and this is the starting-point used for the projection.
It compares with an average of 102.0 prior to the November MPC meeting—a rise of just under 3%.
It is difficult to predict turning-points precisely, and the weaker output figure in Q4 may reflect an earlier turning-point, rather than a deeper slowdown.
But there are clear risks from the increase in money in the past two years, if it feeds through to higher nominal demand and, in turn, to a faster rate of increase in earnings and prices.
Chart 6.1 shows the MPC’s probability distribution for the four-quarter growth rate of GDP.
But the central case is for a somewhat lower level of output during the next two years, reflecting the recent data.
Those indicators have yet to fall below the levels reached in earlier periods of strong GDP growth.
This was slightly slower than the growth in aggregate M4 during the period.
M0 grew by 6.7% in the year to 1997 Q4, much the same as its average annual growth rate in 1996.
Whole-economy average underlying earnings grew by 43/4% in November 1997 compared with a year earlier— 1/4 percentage point higher than in October and 1/2 percentage point above that in September (see Chart 3.1).
The most likely path is for RPIX inflation to fall slightly over the next year or so, before rising to just above the target of 21/2% by the end of the forecast horizon.
The twelve-month growth rate of broad money was 11.6% in December, compared with 10.5% in November and 10.8% in October.
As a result, and notwithstanding the lower level of output, the current projection embodies a slightly higher profile for inflation in the next two years relative to that in the November Report.
The central projection for RPIX inflation at the two-year forecasting horizon is a little higher than in November.
The MPC’s projection of the twelve-month RPIX inflation rate is shown in Chart 2.
But the central case is for a somewhat lower level of output during the next two years, reflecting the recent data.
The MPC’s probability distribution for the four-quarter growth rate of GDP is shown in Chart 1.
Earnings growth rose by half a percentage point over the past quarter, and private sector earnings growth is now over 5%.
In the year to 1997 Q4, OFIs’ deposits grew by 26.5%, compared with an average yearly rate of 12.6% since the start of the current expansion in 1992.
Indeed, the preliminary estimate of GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 1997 was, at 0.5%, markedly weaker than expected in the November Report, and suggests that this may already be happening.
Earnings growth, especially in the private sector, has risen since November and is now at a level which is not easy to reconcile with the inflation target.
The starting-point for the nominal effective exchange rate in the inflation projection, based on its average value in the 15 working days to 4 February, was 104.9—around 2.8% higher than the starting-point used in the November Report.
--------1--------
The stock of vacancies was virtually the same in the final three months of the year, after several months of significant increases.
Unit labour costs for the whole economy rose by 2.6% in 1997 Q3 compared with a year earlier; a higher rate of increase is likely in 1997 Q4, because earnings growth has risen while GDP growth has fallen without signs of a corresponding fall yet in employment growth.
Wage settlements in the second half of 1997 were higher than in the first half, according to the Bank’s database, but it is too early to say whether this represented a clear trend.
The ‘New Deal’ began to be introduced in January this year.
Between September and December, relatively few settlements were recorded, so it would be unwise to place too much weight on those figures.
The January settlements figure is likely to be a better reflection of general trends, because that is the month in which a quarter of the settlements on the Bank database have usually been agreed, covering around 10% of the workforce.
The provisional estimates shown in Table 3.A indicate a rise in settlements between December and January.
There are further indications that settlements will be higher in 1998.
Around a half of the businesses surveyed expected higher basic pay increases for their workers in 1998 compared with 1997; only some 10% expected a lower settlement.
(1) Annualised shorter-term growth rates remain below the twelve-month rate, suggesting that broad money growth has slowed slightly relative to the first half of 1997 (see Table 1.A).
Bank estimates, derived from the Gallup/GFK survey of consumers, indicate that one year ahead RPI inflation expectations have remained stable at around 31/2% since the beginning of 1997.
The Barclays Basix Survey (see Table 3.B) indicates that one year ahead inflation expectations have remained broadly flat between September and December 1997.
The unemployment claimant count was 5% of the workforce in December, after falling by an average of almost 21,000 a month in 1997 Q4.
But the trend appears to be flat over the past year, albeit at a high level.
It also fell in the autumn, to 26.6%, from 26.9% in the summer (see Chart 3.5).
There was also a significant increase in employment of 73,000 (0.3%) during 1997 Q3 according to the Workforce in Employment measure (estimated by the ONS from a quarterly survey of businesses).
Employment rose by 0.4% in the autumn, slightly above its rate of growth in the summer, according to the LFS.
Though the number of manufacturing employees fell by 20,000 in Q3, it rose by 9,000 in the two months to November.
Though the reported numbers showed a fall of 22,000 in November and 10,000 in December, 30,000 of the cumulative fall was caused by the Employment Service removing an overstatement in the stock; a residual error in the stock of some 10,000 remains.
According to the LFS, these rose by 0.6% in the autumn, the same rate of increase as in the summer but more than the rise in employment.
Though skilled labour shortages fell back slightly in the latest January Survey, they remained high (see Chart 3.6).
Furthermore, the shortages of unskilled labour in the January Survey stayed close to their previous cyclical peak in 1988.
The British Chambers of Commerce indicated that more firms in both manufacturing and services were experiencing recruitment difficulties in their January survey compared with the October one.
Domestic demand grew at an average quarterly rate of 1% during the first three quarters of 1997, its highest since 1994.
According to the LFS, employment rose by 117,000 in autumn 1997 or 0.4% on the previous quarter, a slightly faster pace than in the summer.
And it was lower than the DETR index, which suggested that house price inflation was 10.6% in the year to 1997 Q3.
The Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR) for the first nine months of fiscal year 1997/98 was £6.1 billion, compared with £16.3 billion in the first nine months of the previous fiscal year.
Consumers’ expenditure grew rapidly during the first half of 1997 (see Table 2.B).
The growth rate of OFIs’ deposits has fallen recently: the growth rate was 4.7% in 1997 Q4, compared with an average quarterly growth rate of 6.8% in the first three quarters of the year.
Chart 2.5 shows that spending on durable goods rose rapidly in the first three quarters of 1997 relative to spending on non-durables; this was probably related in part to windfall spending.
Though spending on durables slowed in 1997 Q3, the growth of spending on services rose.
Though exports (excluding oil and erratics) to the EU fell by 3.7% in the three months to November on the previous three months, import growth from the EU has been subdued.
Retail sales volumes fell by 0.1% in December, having fallen by 0.5% in the previous month.
The three-month growth rate of retail sales peaked in July before falling during the second half of the year, but retail sales growth remains high (see Chart 2.6).
Chart 2.6 shows that the GFK index of consumer confidence rose to +4.5 in January, up from +0.2 in December, and remained at historically high levels.
The most recent MORI Survey gave a more subdued picture of consumer confidence, but it lags the GFK by one month: MORI reported a balance of -4 in December, unchanged on the previous month and its lowest in 1997.
As Chart 2.2 shows, export volumes of goods (excluding oil and erratics) fell by 1.3% in the three months to November compared with the previous three months, the first such fall since 1993, and import volumes rose during the period.
And equity prices have risen by a further 11.7% since November.
Manufacturing output fell by 0.4% in 1997 Q4, its largest fall since 1991.
The Halifax index rose by 0.6% in January, and the annual rate of house price inflation rose to 5.8%.
According to this estimate, house price inflation was 7.9% in 1997 Q3, slightly above the Halifax index in the same period, but much lower than the Nationwide index.
The savings ratio fell to 10.8% in the third quarter, down from 12.6% in the second quarter.
The annual growth rate of banks’ retail deposits in 1997 Q4 was 5.1%, compared with an average of 6% in the first three quarters of 1997 and 6.5% in 1996 as a whole.
Real whole-economy investment rose by an average of 0.7% in the first three quarters of 1997, above its average quarterly increase of 0.5% since the recovery began in 1992 Q1.
Domestic demand in the G7 picked up in 1997 Q3, as Table 2.A shows.
On this measure, house price inflation was around 8% in the year to 1997 Q3, though this may be revised up.
The Halifax house price index rose by 5.8% in the year to January, compared with an increase in the Nationwide index of 13.1% in the same period.
A third measure, the Department of Environment, Transport and the Regions (DETR) house price index, rose by 7.9% in the year to 1997 Q4, though it was closer to the Nationwide index for most of 1997.
Second, it is less timely than the Halifax and Nationwide indices.
In 1990 prices, stocks rose by £260 million in 1997 Q3, the smallest quarterly increase for three years (excluding the alignment adjustment).
Retail stocks rose by a cumulative total of nearly £900 million in the first three quarters of 1997.
But the Nationwide index rose by 1.2% in January, to an annual rate of 13.1%.
The New Deal for young people covers all those aged 18–24 who have claimed the Jobseeker’s Allowance for six months or more.
In each year of this recovery, the percentage increase in real unit labour costs has been lower than would have been expected based on the average relationship since 1980 (see Chart 3.7).
The sterling price of Brent crude oil fell sharply between October and January (see Chart 4.2).
RPIY annual inflation, which also excludes excise duties, was 2.2% in December.
Probability distributions of expected three-month market interest rates in the United Kingdom, derived from option price data, are shown in Chart 1.9.
The headline inflation rate (RPI) was 3.6% in the twelve months to December.
The price of oil fell significantly in December and January.
The HICP inflation rate, the most directly comparable measure, was very similar in the United Kingdom to other EU Member States’ inflation rates, though UK inflation was generally higher using headline national measures (see Table 4.D).
Measured at factor cost, it rose by 2.4% in the year to 1997 Q3, slightly lower than the equivalent RPIX inflation rate.
Because import prices fell in the past year, the FEPI rose by less than the GDP deflator (2.1%, compared with 2.4%, in the year to 1997 Q3).
Though bank lending to smaller firms was flat during the first half of 1997, it has slowed since 1993.
Annual RPIX service price inflation was 2.9% in December, compared with goods price inflation of 2.1%.
Commodity prices have fallen in the past three months, and these have been reflected in lower input prices to the manufacturing sector.
First, consumer confidence had fallen back, albeit from a relatively high level.
Second, the three-month growth rate of retail sales had slowed.
In the year to 1997 Q4, ICCs’ sterling borrowing from banks and building societies rose by 2.9%, compared with an average annual growth rate of around 14% in 1996.
Retail sales had bounced back in October, which was likely to support consumption in the fourth quarter.
Second, it seemed implausible that any substantial output gap remained.
The Merrill Lynch-Gallup Survey of fund managers suggests that inflation expectations for December 1998 have not, at 3.2%, changed during the past three months (see Table 6.D).
Table 3.B (see Section 3) shows that according to the Barclays Basix Survey, inflation expectations were broadly flat between September and December.
Longer-term market expectations of RPI inflation, derived by comparing conventional with index-linked government bond prices, have fallen below 3% at maturities of five and ten years (see Chart 6.9).
At its meeting on 3–4 December, the Committee discussed the first estimate by the ONS of the expenditure breakdown of the Q3 GDP figures (see Table 5.A).
But there are signs that the pace of growth has moderated since the first half of 1997.
The UK Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose by 1.8% in the twelve months to December.
Manufacturers’ margins on domestic sales probably widened in 1997, as weighted costs fell while output prices rose (see Table 4.C).
The one-month future price fell to below £9 per barrel in January, its lowest since 1994.
The six-month future price fell by nearly as much as the one-month future price, suggesting that the market expects this lower price to persist in the first half of 1998.
In December, OPEC agreed to raise its production ceiling by around 10% to 271/2 million barrels per day with effect from 1 January.
Metals prices, for example, fell by around 12% (in sterling) between October and January.
The prices of some foods (such as soya beans) have fallen while the prices of others (such as coffee) have risen.
And The Economist’s non-food agricultural prices index in sterling terms was around 11% lower in January than October.
Retail prices excluding mortgage interest payments (RPIX) rose by 2.7% in the twelve months to December (see Chart 4.5).
The index of average input prices (including labour costs) fell from a peak of 60.1 in April last year to 56.0 in January (see Table 4.B).
Medium-term inflation expectations, as derived from conventional and index-linked gilts, have fallen further since the November Report (see Chart 1.11).
The CIPS index of average prices charged was 51.3 in January.
Input prices in the manufacturing sector fell sharply in 1997 Q4, and were 91/2% lower in December than a year earlier.
The Bank’s commodity price index was 12% lower in December than a year earlier.
As the table shows, each of the forecasters has significantly revised down their expectations of Japanese growth in 1998.
The CBI Industrial Trends Survey asks firms whether or not they have raised prices during the past four months, and whether or not they expect to raise prices during the next four months.
Annual inflation measured by the output prices index excluding excise duties was only 0.2% in December.
The balance of firms expecting to increase prices during the next four months in the latest CBI Survey was the lowest ever in a January survey.
--------2--------
This happened in 1996, when manufacturing output growth was very slow.
It grew more slowly in the third quarter, partly because of a temporary fall in consumers’ expenditure during the week preceding the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales.
Real broad money grew by around 8.7% in the year to 1997 Q4, well above its long-run average of 4.4%, which continues to point to strong real domestic demand growth.
The imminent slowdown in economic growth will, in due course, reduce the rates of increase of money and nominal demand and, in turn, of earnings and prices.
Broad money growth also, despite moderating slightly, still poses upside risks to nominal demand and inflation over the next two years.
This raised the growth rate of net financial wealth in the second quarter to 8.3%.
The MPC judges that the most likely scenario is that money velocity will continue to decline more gradually in 1998 than in the past few years.
Several factors suggest that consumption growth will slow during 1998, but continue to grow above its historical trend.
Recent movements in broad money velocity have been difficult to explain.
Broad money now shows signs of slowing, but only gradually.
Although consumption growth has slowed, it will be underpinned this year by the rapid rise in wealth in 1997 and continuing real growth of employment income.
This was driven by rapid growth in personal sector wealth during the year, mainly as a result of rising equity prices.
But earnings growth is above 5% in the private sector, and pay settlements showed signs of edging up in January.
The slowdown in money growth was preceded by a slowdown in lending, particularly to the corporate sector.
And private consumption was revised down significantly.
Real personal disposable income fell by 1.3% in 1997 Q3.
Judgments need to be made about trends in velocity to interpret the relationship between broad money and nominal demand for use in the inflation projection.
One was that the level of activity was already above trend.
Consumption growth is expected to slow during 1998, but to remain above its historical trend.
The MPC’s projection for inflation assumes that aggregate M4 velocity will decline gradually during the next two years, consistent with the forecast shown in Section 6, so long as broad money growth continues to slow.
The Committee noted two developments that might suggest consumption growth had peaked.
Service sector output grew by 4.4% in the year to 1997 Q4, faster than its trend rate of 2.4%.
But the continued rapid growth of broad money, domestic demand and output meant that the balance of risks to inflation was still on the upside.
Broad money continues to grow at double-digit rates (see Chart 1.1).
Despite moderating a little in 1997, narrow money growth remains strong.
Employment has continued to grow strongly.
In making its projections, the MPC has assumed that the fall in the ratio of stocks to output since the early 1980s will continue at a moderate pace during the next two years, as stock management techniques continue to improve.
Within this total, service sector output grew by 1% during the quarter.
Broad money velocity has been below its long-run average since 1987 and has fallen further since 1995.
It was not clear whether the Q3 data represented an earlier-than-expected slowdown, or a temporary fall in growth influenced by the death of Diana, Princess of Wales.
The underlying increase in narrow money, as measured by notes and coin, was 6.9% in the year to December.
But the recent rapid growth of broad money remains a threat to meeting the inflation target in the medium term.
The MPC’s projection for inflation assumes that aggregate broad money velocity will decline gradually during the next two years, consistent with the inflation forecast so long as broad money continues to slow.
There is little sign of a slowdown in the personal sector’s demand for broad money: personal sector M4 continues to grow at an annual rate of around 8%.
OFIs have been net depositors during this period.
Chart 1.4 suggests that the growth rate of credit to the personal sector has been relatively stable since 1994, after slowing in the early 1990s.
Aggregate lending activity has already slowed and may foreshadow slower domestic demand growth.
(1) As Chart 1.2 shows, the ratio of ICCs’ broad money to total financial wealth has been broadly stable since 1990, but has picked up since 1996.
Credit growth to OFIs, which accounts for some 20% of aggregate M4 lending, remains strong, though some of this reflects a rebound in lending via reverse gilt repo.
The slowdown in credit preceded the moderation in broad money growth and, as Chart 1.4 shows, much of this was accounted for by ICCs.
Though signs of moderation are emerging, the pace of monetary growth remains rapid.
But the growth rate of other, unsecured, forms of lending has been much stronger.
Chart 1.2 shows that the ratio of the personal sector’s broad money to total financial wealth has been falling as personal sector wealth has continued to increase.
Consumption growth is expected to slow during 1998.
But the increase in wealth, together with recent strong income growth, remains consistent with above-trend consumption growth.
There is evidence that this worsening performance continued in 1997 Q4.
Lending to ICCs has continued to weaken.
ICCs’ holdings of broad money continued to slow, rising by 5.9% in the year to 1997 Q4, compared with 8.5% in 1997 Q3.
Aggregate Divisia money, a measure that reflects the extent to which the components of broad money are used in transactions, grew by 10.8% in the year to 1997 Q4, compared with 10.1% in 1997 Q3.
Within the aggregate, Divisia money grew more rapidly than broad money in the personal and OFIs sectors, but more slowly in the corporate sector (see Table 1.B).
The slower narrow money growth in the latter part of 1997 has coincided with slower nominal retail spending growth.
All had experienced rapid, investment-led growth in recent years, with large capital inflows and strong credit growth.
--------3--------
The Korean won, which was linked to the US dollar, came under pressure.
Consumption growth is expected to be driven by the rapid growth in wealth in 1997 and real wage increases, reflecting tightness in the labour market (see Section 3).
Measures of the real interest rate, calculated from sterling indexlinked bonds, have also fallen, and account for some of the reduction in nominal rates.
If workers on the New Deal displace employable people not covered by the scheme, then many from this latter group should be able to find other jobs at a slightly lower real wage.
The relationship between these two real-wage series depends on two main factors: the terms of trade, and taxes on employment income and consumers’ expenditure.
Most of the small rise in prices during 1997 was caused by tax increases.
Skilled labour shortages and plant capacity were cited as important factors likely to limit output in the next four months.
Rising bankruptcies and Korean banks’ difficulties in meeting short-term debt obligations led to liquidity problems, and a loss of confidence in the banking sector.
Labour market tightness is the key influence on real wage pressure in the short run.
A higher ratio of real consumption to real product wages should mean, other things being equal, lower overall real wage pressure, because at a given level of demand for hours worked there would be a greater effective supply.
Lower taxes on income have also lifted the real consumption wage relative to the real product wage in recent years.
Over the past year, import prices have fallen more rapidly than export prices and boosted both the terms of trade and the real consumption wage relative to the real product wage.
The real consumption wage outpaced the real product wage, continuing a more general trend that dates back to the early 1980s.
Third, recent wage settlements and reports of skill shortages were a matter of concern, and an immediate move in interest rates would send a clear and early signal to the labour market of the MPC’s determination to achieve the inflation target.
(1) So the chart does not provide a direct measure of market expectations of official interest rates.
The fall in UK real rates relative to overseas rates may reflect expectations of a real sterling appreciation.
And firms undertook large, generally unhedged, foreign currency borrowings on the assumption that the pegged exchange rate regimes would be maintained.
The main upside risks stem from the possibility of a more rapid fall in the exchange rate than that implied by interest rate differentials, past rapid money growth and, particularly, pressures in the labour market.
Nominal earnings growth higher than 41/2% a year and unit labour costs rising more quickly than 21/2% could not be sustained in the long run, unless domestically generated inflation were higher than 21/2%.
In Asia, currencies have depreciated, bond yields have risen and stock markets have fallen.
Real GDP grew by an estimated 3.3% in 1997, significantly faster than its long-term trend rate of growth.
By contrast, US real yields were little changed (see Chart 1.12), though this may partly reflect the fact that the US inflation-indexed market has only been in operation since January 1997.
Wage bargainers negotiate over future real wages and are therefore interested in what will happen to prices.
The LFS measures of both short and long-term unemployment had fallen significantly, and hours worked had increased.
Though banks have passed through the official rate rise in November, a number of building societies have yet to do so.
Though the ratio of house prices to earnings has been broadly stable during the past year, past interest rate increases and the reduction in mortgage interest tax relief are expected to moderate house price inflation in 1998.
Correct measures of real wages, looked at from both sides of the wage bargain, would incorporate expectations about the relevant price indices.
But measures of expectations are imprecise and are not available for all appropriate price indices.
In these circumstances, estimates of real wages based on actual price outturns provide an alternative.
The four-quarter growth rate of the real product wage has increased over the past year (see Chart 3.3).
It is difficult to attribute changes in the real interest rate solely to structural factors, such as a change in productivity, or to institutional factors in domestic or overseas markets.
Changes in short-term unemployment (those unemployed for less than twelve months) are probably more important for gauging changes in labour market tightness than changes in long-term unemployment.
The change in nominal interest rates can be decomposed into changes in expected real interest rates and in inflation expectations.
Another measure of labour market slack is provided by the proportion of the population of working age who are not employed.
In Brazil, pressure on the currency prompted the authorities to double interest rates and announce a tightening of fiscal policy.
Most pressures on exchange rates in these markets occurred in late October.
That would cause unit labour costs to rise cyclically in both nominal and real terms, although this might be offset by a similar cyclical fall in profit margins.
The growth of real unit labour costs (the real product wage relative to productivity) tends to rise as unemployment falls.
Short-term unemployment rose slightly in the summer, but resumed a downward path in the autumn, according to the LFS (see Chart 3.4): the fall in the total of 150,000 was evenly distributed between short-term and long-term unemployment.
These include institutional and regulatory reforms which have promoted flexibility in the labour market and a lower level of unemployment benefit relative to the earnings of those in work (the replacement ratio).
The main upside risks stem from the possibility of a more rapid fall in the exchange rate than that implied by interest rate differentials, past rapid money growth and, particularly, pressures in the labour market.
Whole-economy unit labour costs were probably rising in real terms in 1997 Q4, unlike most of the 1990s when they had been falling.
The Government’s New Deal for unemployed people (see box on page 29) will probably affect the responsiveness of real earnings to unemployment.
The short-term profile for inflation continues to be affected by the assumption on import price pass-through.
The central projection uses a broad measure of labour market tightness, the non-employment rate, so there is an upside risk to the inflation projection if, in particular, the short-term unemployment measure is more appropriate.
It focuses on groups who have become, or who risk becoming, marginalised from the labour market: those aged under 25 who have been unemployed for more than six months and those aged 25 and over who have been unemployed for more than two years.
It is likely that short-term unemployment has more of an influence than long-term unemployment on real earnings behaviour;  the former is currently below the trough reached in the late 1980s.
If successful, the policy should help to increase the effective supply of labour and thereby reduce pressure on wages.
That would be twice as long as import prices have previously taken to react to a change in the exchange rate.
The implications for inflation depend on how far this tightening will lead to higher earnings growth and wage settlements.
There is a risk of a more marked rise in earnings growth if the short-term trade-off between labour market tightness and real earnings is steeper than assumed.
This measure, called the non-employment rate, is wider than unemployment, because it includes all those who are potentially available for work, perhaps now or with a short lag, and those who are never likely to work.
Japanese expected short-run interest rates have changed very little.
The projection assumes that growth in real earnings is lower for any given level of unemployment than in the 1980s, and that there has been a fall in the natural rate of unemployment.
Real earnings growth has increased.
But unemployment would most likely stop falling during 1998, without the schemes, hence this factor should be less important when the New Deal has been fully introduced.
The measure of labour market tightness used in the central inflation projection is the non-employment rate relative to any likely shifts in its equilibrium level.
But the risks to the central projection incorporate the view that the LFS measure of unemployment, particularly short-term unemployment, may indicate an even tighter labour market.
‘Churning’ means that the scheme may not improve participants’ employability, so that when they leave the programme they simply become unemployed again.
There is evidence that this is expected in the reductions in future interest rate changes implied in yield curves.
Ultimately, slower growth will ease labour market pressures and push earnings growth down.
It is also consistent with the increased opportunity cost of holding non interest bearing money balances when interest rates are higher, though the full impact of the interest rate rises since May is unlikely to have fed through yet.
--------4--------
Unemployment fell by 150,000 in the autumn,(1) according to the Labour Force Survey (LFS).
And service sector capacity constraints have lessened since the end of 1996, according to the British Chambers of Commerce Survey.
The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) Survey showed that cost pressures have fallen since the first half of 1997.
The CIPS Survey recorded an increase in service sector activity in January, though it remained below levels recorded during summer 1997.
Most of the forward-looking indicators in the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) Survey for 1997 Q4—including investment intentions and confidence—were lower, suggesting that firms are expecting slower growth (see Chart 2.10).
But there are signs that the pace of service sector activity has passed its peak and may be slowing.
Other indicators also suggest that the labour market continues to tighten.
The fall in manufacturing output is consistent with recent survey evidence which suggests that the manufacturing sector is slowing down.
Cost pressures in the service sector have fallen, but price inflation has not slowed.
The CBI quarterly Industrial Trends Survey recorded a balance of +2 for new orders expectations in January, the least positive response in the survey since 1992.
So changes in personal sector savings behaviour and structural changes in the financial sector explain much of the fall in the ratio.
The CBI Survey only covers manufacturing, but the labour market from which its respondents recruit probably has a high overlap with other industries.
Within aggregate M4, financial institutions other than banks (OFIs) have built up deposits quickly since 1995.
The labour market has continued to tighten over the past three months, according to most measures.
This comprised a rise of 152,000 in employees in employment, which was offset by a fall in self-employment and workers on government schemes.
This reflected revised Inland Revenue treatment of sub-contractors, which reduced the attractiveness of self-employment.
And ‘other costs’ refer to a variety of factors, such as taxes, rental costs, bought-in services and labour costs.
Within this series, there was a large rise in service sector employment, where the number of employees increased by 69,000.
Evidence on recruitment intentions suggests that employment growth will remain at around its current level in early 1998.
Even though imported services are nearly one quarter of total imports, these are almost exclusively purchased by the corporate sector.
In their January surveys, both the CBI and the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) showed manufacturers’ employment intentions strengthening,(1) for the first few months of 1998.
Evidence from unfilled vacancies data, however, does not indicate more labour market tightening.
Though the unadjusted BCC Survey indicated a fall in service sector intentions, analysis by the Bank suggests that this was largely seasonal and that the balance of companies expecting to increase employment was little different from the October survey.
But they also reflect a continuing long-run downward trend in this ratio as the proportion of individuals’ wealth held in equities, either directly or via unit trusts and pension funds, has increased over time.
The Agents’ contact base is predominantly private sector, and manufacturing industry is more heavily represented than in the economy as a whole.
Table 3.A shows the most recent data; summary measures published by Industrial Relations Services are shown for comparison, even though the underlying settlements information is subsumed within the Bank’s measure.
(1) Financial markets have already reacted.
The figure for average settlements was heavily influenced by a single large settlement for the construction sector in August.
Indications of increasing labour market tightness are also evident from survey measures of labour shortages.
There was a marked rise in perceived labour shortages during 1997, according to the CBI Industrial Trends Survey.
This was true of unskilled labour as well as skilled.
But even after smoothing the earnings series, in an attempt to adjust for the effects of bonuses (see Chart 3.2), there was still a small increase in earnings growth in November.
Total hours worked per week are a better measure of labour usage than employment, since they reflect changes in overtime and the balance between full-time and part-time workers.
Chart 2.8 shows that the retail stocks to sales ratio has been on a broadly upward trend since 1993.
Data published in the past three months have indicated that nominal earnings growth rose and that the labour market continued to tighten: unemployment has fallen rapidly, employment growth has remained strong, and skill shortages remain high.
This may partly reflect attempts by OFIs to maintain the share of money balances within their total asset portfolios.
According to Bank for International Settlements (BIS) statistics on foreign bank lending to these regions, new lending to Thailand and the Czech Republic almost completely dried up between the first and second quarters of 1997.
Although consumption will not be supported by substantial windfall gains this year, and will be affected by past monetary and fiscal tightening, its main determinants—personal sector wealth and labour income—have continued to rise rapidly in real terms.
BIS statistics indicate that Japanese banks are the largest individual group of foreign creditors in Asia.
The adjustment of these flows of credit can also be seen in the price of credit.
There are several reasons to expect a relatively strong profile for business investment, including a lower user cost of capital, high stock market valuations, high levels of profitability, increasing capacity constraints and the ready availability of finance.
Business investment has grown more quickly than whole-economy investment since the recovery began, though the rate of growth of business investment slowed during 1997, contrary to the MPC’s expectations.
(1) So to assess the investment picture, it is important to look not only at rates of growth of investment flows, but also at how far firms are from their desired capital stock.
This reflected exceptionally high dividend payments in 1997 Q2, which boosted income growth, rather than a change in savings behaviour.
Such constraints can be seen in the labour market.
Skill shortages remain high, and unemployment continues to fall.
Interest rate spreads on unsecured lending have narrowed in recent months, suggesting that the behaviour of prices and quantities is consistent with an increased supply of unsecured credit in the personal sector.
Mortgage equity withdrawal as a share of disposable income also increased during 1997, in line with the recovery in the housing market.
Surveys of capacity utilisation and skill shortages were of great value as indicators of the output gap.
Because of the uncertainty of output gap estimates, it was important to monitor cost and price indices, even though they were lagging indicators of the gap.
Concern over the possibility of a correction in the equity market may continue to stimulate growth of OFIs’ deposits.
Fourth, concerns were expressed about the buoyancy of asset prices.
These suggest that corporate services price inflation picked up during 1997.
Net financial wealth data were recently revised downwards back to the beginning of 1996, following the receipt of new information from financial institutions about their balance sheets, but there was an upward revision to the personal sector’s asset holdings in 1997 Q2.
Lending to individuals in the form of consumer credit has been strong.
Personal sector net financial wealth rose by 9.8% in 1997 Q3, mainly as a result of the 6.9% increase in equity prices during the quarter.
Equity prices have increased rapidly since 1995, as Chart 2.7 shows.
Changes in consumer confidence are linked to equity and house price developments, which influence personal sector wealth.
The Labour Force Survey (LFS) suggested that the labour market had continued to tighten in the autumn.
The labour market continues to tighten on almost all indicators, but the extent of the tightening on each of the measures differs.
A crucial issue is which observable indicator most accurately measures labour market tightness.
(1) A significant proportion of windfall payouts was expected to be spent on durable goods during the year.
This is largely because LAPFs have increased their deposits, following equity price rises.
That weakness was surprising, and was reflected in both consumption and investment, though government expenditure was strong.
As Chart 1.3 illustrates, the weight attached by financial markets to the likelihood of a stock market correction, as measured by the skew reflected in the FT-SE 100 equity index, increased in the second half of 1997.
Table 1.C shows the flows of deposits into, and lending by, banks and building societies since 1995.
Bank deposit inflows also continue to increase, though slightly more slowly.
Recent evidence from the major British banks suggests that bank borrowing in both production and non-financial services slowed during 1997.
The substantial fall in unemployment, and high levels of reported skill shortages, are evidence of continuing tightening in the labour market.
The availability of credit to ICCs also depends on firm size.
ICCs’ bank borrowing has recently moved closely with the value of domestic mergers and acquisitions (see Chart 1.6).
But as Chart 1.2 shows, since 1994, OFIs’ deposits have increased significantly as a proportion of their financial wealth.
Survey evidence from Barclays Bank also suggests that the balance of firms seeking bank credit facilities to finance capital expenditure fell from more than 40% in the first half of 1997 to 20% in December (see Chart 1.7).
This has coincided, however, with recent surveys becoming less uniformly pessimistic about future export growth.
There were also falls in a number of emerging equity markets, especially in those markets that had risen substantially earlier in the year.
And though ICCs’ net foreign currency issues increased during the first three quarters of 1997, they do not represent a large proportion of the external finance available to larger firms.
Chart 4.4 shows that manufacturing firms are almost always disappointed, suggesting that they have unrealistic expectations.
Price pressures in the service sector are stronger than in the goods sector.
This reflects a corresponding downward trend in the ratio of wholesale stocks to turnover, as retailers have increasingly taken over stockholding from wholesalers.
Large firms are able to raise funds through bond and equity issues, whereas smaller firms are traditionally more reliant on bank finance.
Changes in ICCs’ deposits have, in the past, tended to precede changes in investment.
The growth rate of bank and building society credit to the non-bank private sector (M4 lending) has continued to fall.
--------5--------
On the one hand, despite the one-off effect of the higher level of sterling on commodity and other import prices, inflation has remained stubbornly above the target of 21/2%.
Cost pressures in the goods sector have fallen, but these have not been passed on fully to retail goods prices.
The emphasis on goods prices in the diagram reflects the greater availability of cost data on goods than on services.
Adjusting for the effects of lower import prices and changes in the terms of trade, which temporarily depress retail price inflation, domestically generated inflation is significantly above the target level.
Cost pressures have been less subdued in the service sector, partly because it is less exposed to exchange rate changes.
Sterling has appreciated by 25% since August 1996 (see Chart 1.13).
Import prices have fallen during the past year and a half, but by less than the sterling effective exchange rate has appreciated in the same period.
The current projection incorporates a smaller overall effect of lower import prices on retail prices, and a faster feed-through of changes in domestically generated costs to retail prices than previously estimated.
Since the middle of 1996, when sterling started to appreciate significantly, the prices of imported goods and services have fallen by much less than sterling has risen (see Chart 4.1).
The prices of goods and services have increased in the global market, resulting in a rise in import prices for a given exchange rate.
Foreign exporters have used sterling’s appreciation as an opportunity to widen their margins on exports to the United Kingdom.
In the light of this evidence, the MPC is reviewing the relationship between retail prices, costs and prices of domestically produced output, and import prices.
Since consumption has been the main impetus to recent UK demand growth (see Section 2), the prices of imported consumer goods have reacted less than other import prices to the appreciation (see Table 4.A).
This could have reduced the initial impact of sterling’s appreciation on retail prices, since changes to the prices of imports that are not for direct consumption take time to feed through to retail prices.
Recent evidence suggests that the appreciation of sterling has not reduced retail price inflation by as much as anticipated in previous Reports.
The MPC’s inflation projection assumes that further adjustment of import prices to sterling’s appreciation will occur during 1998.
When the price-level effect from the appreciation of sterling on retail prices wears off, there is likely to be a rise in inflation.
The fall in import prices continues to offset developments in domestically generated price pressures.
But there is great uncertainty about the speed and magnitude of the response, partly because there are few previous illustrative episodes when sterling has appreciated on this scale for such a sustained period.
The diagram below shows how these various costs and prices relate to the retail price index.
The impact of this appreciation on both export and import volumes is now starting to come through.
Adjusting for the effects of lower import prices and changes in the terms of trade, which temporarily depress retail price inflation, domestically generated inflation is significantly above the target level.
Some costs feed into the pipeline at many different points.
The weaker level of world activity will result in lower world prices which, in turn, will be reflected in the prices of goods and services imported into the United Kingdom and, eventually, in RPIX.
The pricing behaviour of retailers in the next two years will be affected by three main factors:  first, any delayed response of retailers to the falls in import prices that have already occurred;  second, the further falls in import prices that are assumed in the MPC’s central projection; and third, the growth rate of domestically generated inflation.
The current projection incorporates a smaller overall effect of lower import prices on retail prices, and a faster feed-through of changes in domestically generated costs to retail prices than previously estimated.
(1) In the light of the higher-than-expected outturns during the past year, the MPC is reviewing the relationship between retail prices, costs and prices of domestically produced output, and import prices.
It is difficult to tell whether this delayed response reflects strong demand, or simply that retailers often delay pass-through of lower costs to prices.
Real index-linked yields also fell in Australia and Canada, but by less than in the United Kingdom.
(1) The index weights together prices of different commodities according to UK demand for them.
Adjusting for the effect of lower import prices and changes in the terms of trade, which temporarily depress retail price inflation, domestically generated inflation is currently above the target level.
Though the weighted costs of retail goods fell during 1997, retailers have not fully passed on these cost reductions as lower prices.
This reduction in margins on export sales partly explains why export volumes have held up during the past 18 months while sterling has risen (see Section 2).
By contrast, margins on export sales appear to have narrowed significantly since the start of 1996, as export prices have been cut by more than the fall in costs during this period.
This may be a reflection of lower cost pressures in 1997 as the price of inputs and imported components fell.
But price disappointment seems to have fallen during 1997, despite lower output price inflation.
The prices of many domestically produced inputs (such as crude oil, which has a 10% weight in the producer price index) are set on world markets, so these too will have been affected by sterling’s appreciation since August 1996.
This reflected falls in the prices of both imported inputs (see Section 4.1) and domestic inputs.
This was partly because import prices, particularly of consumer goods, fell by less than earlier projected.
The monthly trade figures suggest that net exports fell sharply in the fourth quarter, consistent with an increasing effect from sterling’s cumulative 25% appreciation since its trough in August 1996.
As the box on page 31 shows, more than half of UK manufacturers’ inputs are imported, so the fall in world industrial commodity prices should reduce UK input prices either directly, or indirectly through imports of finished or semi-finished manufactures that use raw materials in their production.
Since mid 1996, import prices have fallen by less than sterling has appreciated, but adjustment still seems to be taking place.
But asset prices had also risen further.
But input and output price inflation were, if anything, lower than expected.
For example, fresh food prices feed directly into the retail price index, but other food is processed first and enters higher up the pipeline.
The recent evidence suggests that the appreciation of sterling has not reduced retail price inflation as much as anticipated in previous Reports.
For example, foreign holidays are priced by domestic firms, but will reflect the cost of purchasing overseas services.
This illustration does not imply that retail prices are determined by weighting together various costs.
Unlike the GDP deflator, it is affected by import price changes.
A supply shock, such as a fall in oil prices, might first show up as a decrease in input prices, then feed down the pipeline until it affects retail prices.
Increased demand for goods might put pressure on scarce resources, feeding up the pipeline as higher costs.
Retail price inflation remained stubbornly high.
So changes in costs are not always a lead indicator of changes in retail prices.
The central projection assumes that import prices fall further during 1998, and that this feeds through to retail goods prices after a delay.
Retail price inflation in 1997 was higher than expected in previous Reports, reflecting the lower-than-expected falls in import prices and a rise in retail goods prices relative to costs.
The possibility that Iraq’s oil exports would be increased under the UN food-for-oil deal also pushed the oil price lower.
But a shock to demand, such as the recent windfall payouts, which have boosted consumption, might first be noticed at the point of consumption as an increase in retail prices.
So there will be a fall in the net demand for UK goods and services.
This is because shocks that affect the economy can feed up or down the pipeline.
There were higher bonuses in both manufacturing, where higher overtime payments were also a factor, and services.
The terms of trade are the ratio of export to import prices, and represent how many foreign goods and services can be exchanged for a unit of domestic goods and services.
This could have been because retailers were increasing their stocks in anticipation of even stronger demand: the Bank’s regional Agencies have reported a stock overhang among retailers, and strong price discounting in the January sales.
And the impact on the United Kingdom will not be nearly as significant as the effect of sterling’s appreciation against countries in the ERI since its trough in August 1996.
The fall may have been partly because of a weak external demand: output in the investment and intermediate goods sectors, which had been contributing to manufacturing and export growth, fell by 1.7% and 1.6% respectively in 1997 Q4.
Part of sterling’s appreciation since August 1996 has been ascribed to portfolio and erratic factors.
Data releases and revisions to past numbers suggest that sterling’s 25% appreciation since August 1996 has begun to affect UK trade.
The United Kingdom’s net trade position was relatively strong during the first half of 1997, but is now deteriorating.
--------6--------
But survey evidence is mixed—for example, the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) Survey in January suggested that business optimism fell sharply, to its lowest balance since the fourth quarter of 1995.
Data from the Halifax and Nationwide give differing pictures of recent developments in house prices.
So far, the Bank has received data on 66 settlements covering a third of the workers that we would expect to settle in that month.
On the other hand, the Bank’s estimate, based on the Land Registry data, is more comprehensive than either of the other indices, since it covers nearly all transactions.
But, as always, there is a high degree of uncertainty about the latest output data.
In 1996, for example, the Land Registry sample size was 950,000 and the Halifax’s sample size was 175,000.
The Land Registry sample also includes purchases of unmortgaged properties as well as mortgaged ones.
Fourth, the data only cover England and Wales, whereas the other indices measure house prices in the United Kingdom as a whole.
Other forecasters have also provided the Bank with their assessments of the probabilities that they attach to various possible inflation outcomes (see Table 6.B).
More recent monthly data confirm this picture.
The Bank has developed an alternative house price index, which is discussed in the box on page 19.
These may be important advantages at a time when the other indicators are diverging.
The chart shows that in the year to 1997 Q3, house prices rose by 7.9%, according to the mix-adjusted Land Registry data.
It is possible, however, that the Bank’s estimate will be revised upwards with the next release of Land Registry data at the end of February.
A comparison of outturns with prior expectations reveals whether or not firms have been disappointed with their pricing outcome.
This showed some signs that net exports were weakening, once allowance had been made for erratic items (see Section 2).
In discussion of the output gap, the MPC noted the difficulties in estimating potential output.
No breakdown of the expenditure components would be available until late February, but monthly data suggested a strong negative contribution from net exports.
The Bank’s regional Agencies conducted an informal survey of their contacts during December 1997, asking about pay prospects in 1998; the results were reported to the MPC in January.
Bank estimates suggest that the contribution of net trade, excluding oil and erratics, to GDP growth turned from positive to negative during 1997 (see Chart 2.1).
In the absence of any clear reason for the divergence, research undertaken in the Bank has used data from the Land Registry to supplement the MPC’s view of developments in the housing market.
The Land Registry records sales at the date of completion, whereas the Halifax and Nationwide use the approval date; and Land Registry data are published two months after the end of the quarter.
There had been relatively little news in the last month’s data that helped resolve this question, given that the Committee had already expected a strong fourth quarter.
This box outlines the construction of an estimate based on data from the Land Registry.
This section of the Report discusses a wide range of data on costs and prices.
This compares with the Halifax and Nationwide’s use of a broad range of mix-adjustment variables, including house size.
Land Registry data have been mix-adjusted by Bank staff to correct for changes in the proportion of houses bought and sold in each county and for different house types.
External finance sought by both large and small firms appears to have lessened: ICCs’ net sterling capital issues weakened in 1997, down from a monthly average of around £1 billion in 1996 to £0.7 billion in 1997.
The published Land Registry data are not mix-adjusted, so their average price may change either because of changes in the mix of houses bought and sold each quarter, or because of changes in the price of a given type of house.
Possible reasons for the divergence between the Halifax and Nationwide indices include differences in the institutions’ samples, in their methodologies, and in the weight they give to transactions from each region in the United Kingdom.
Third, the estimate is subject to revisions as late forms are received by the Land Registry; when house prices are increasing, these revisions are likely to be upwards.
A further view was that recent data were encouraging for the inflation outlook.
The Nationwide and Halifax house price indices have been diverging since the beginning of 1997.
--------7--------
It was agreed that Asian developments would need to be considered carefully in the preparation of the February Report.
These spreads were around 100 basis points in many East Asian and Latin American countries in early 1997, but had widened to at least 200 basis points towards the end of 1997.
So there was a case for waiting to see further developments.
Taking into account the anticipated monetary policy response in the industrialised world, as reflected in the almost 50 basis point fall in market expectations of short-term interest rates, the impact on output growth in the industrialised world in 1998 is likely to be of the order of half a percentage point.
But the Committee agreed that they would need to see further evidence of lower consumption growth in order to conclude that policy was on course to achieve the inflation target.
This is consistent with a robust investment outlook, which is reflected in the central projection.
The MPC has used the IMF and OECD projections as a baseline from which to form its views of the effects of Asian developments on the UK economy, making use of new information since publication of the IMF and OECD forecasts.
The downside risks to inflation stem mainly from the possibility of a larger fall in output and demand than in the central case.
This section provides a summary of the economic news and the monetary policy decisions taken by the MPC since the November Report, and leads in to the new projection for inflation in Section 6.
The IMF expects world output to slow from 4% in 1996 and 1997 to around 31/2% in 1998, which is about 1 percentage point lower than the projection in May.
The Committee identified a range of possible views on the outlook for inflation.
The impact on growth in Europe will, if anything, be slightly smaller.
Hence, the larger of the two effects on UK net trade is likely to come from the higher value of sterling.
In particular, if interest rates turned out to be higher than the market expects, the impact on world trade, growth and inflation could be larger than in the central case, and this is reflected in the distribution of risks.
The probabilities were skewed towards rates being above the central band.
Both of these were probably related to the strong growth of UK demand last year.
Growth in European economies picked up in the year to 1997 Q2, partly because of stronger domestic demand growth.
Growth could peak in Q4, as the MPC had projected.
Recent developments in Asia could mean that the slowdown in 1998 was more pronounced than assumed in the November projections.
On this basis, the MPC has concluded that, taking all the effects together, growth in the main industrialised economies could be reduced by around half a percentage point by 1999 in the central case.
Domestic demand in the third quarter was weaker than expected at the time of the November Report.
The IMF has revised down its forecast for growth in newly industrialised Asian economies (Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore) in 1998 by 2.5 percentage points since May.
The projection was agreed by the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) on 5 February.
Recent developments in Asia provide the main international economic news since the November Report, and are likely to reduce the growth of world trade and GDP and inflation during the next two years.
The central projection is that growth, having already peaked, will continue to fall, before rising again towards the end of the forecasting horizon as the contribution of net trade to GDP growth becomes less negative.
Second, and more importantly, the projection implied a slowdown in external demand following sterling’s appreciation.
The MPC’s assumptions about activity and inflation in overseas economies—and the impact of the Asian turbulence on the world economy—start from the projections made by the OECD and IMF (see Section 2).
The central projection assumes that the impact of the Asian crisis will be to reduce the level of world GDP by up to 1 percentage point, and the level of GDP in the major six overseas economies by around half a percentage point.
(2) This contribution has been relatively constant and small in recent months.
Such a fall would lead to weaker domestic demand than in the central case.
At this juncture, with output growth likely to fall sharply, monetary policy is more finely balanced than at any point since the inflation target was introduced in 1992.
The impact on UK net exports is expected to be just under half a percentage point of GDP during the next two years, broadly similar to that expected in other European economies, but slightly less than in the United States and much less than in Japan.
The central projection assumes that equity prices grow in line with nominal GDP.
Once the effects of the Asian crisis have been taken into account, the central projection for GDP growth in the major six overseas economies(1) in 1998 and 1999 is broadly the same as in 1997.
There is a risk, however, that policy overseas will be tighter than expected by the markets in the next year or so, which would lead to weaker world activity than assumed in the central case.
But it is always possible that GDP and its components could be revised.
The probability of a major depression in the world economy is thought to be extremely small, and has not been allowed for in the inflation projections.
In that event, the MPC’s inflation projection and policy stance would be revised.
World GDP, trade and inflation will be weaker as a result of the adjustment.
However, the MPC believes that there is a risk of a larger depreciation through unwinding of the portfolio and erratic factors discussed in previous Reports.
The overall shape of the output projection is broadly similar to November.
Net trade in goods, excluding oil and erratics, made a negative contribution of 0.5 percentage points, and trade in services made a negative contribution of 0.2 percentage points to GDP growth in 1997 Q3.
The central projection assumes that sterling’s appreciation will have some additional effect on retail prices during 1998.
So the overall picture is of only small downward revisions to forecasts of world trade and GDP growth in 1998.
The overall shape of the output projection is broadly similar to November.
In its assessment of the outlook for the public finances, the MPC has taken government nominal expenditure plans and effective tax rates from the July Budget and the November Pre-Budget Report as its central case.
This is reflected in an upward skew to the inflation projection.
The MPC has assumed that recent developments in Asia will reduce UK output by around half a percentage point by the end of 1999, in the central case.
The downside risks to inflation stem mainly from the possibility of a larger fall in output and demand than in the central case.
The MPC has assumed that equity prices will grow in line with nominal GDP during the forecast period.
The central projection is that growth, having already peaked, will continue to fall, before rising again towards the end of the forecasting horizon as the contribution of net trade to GDP growth becomes less negative.
Developments in Asia, as well as slowing domestic demand, suggested the possibility of an earlier turning-point in GDP growth than implied by the central projection in the November Report.
(1) The single most likely outcome for GDP growth is within the central band (with the darkest shading), which is judged to contain 10% of the probability distribution.
There was, therefore, a strong case for waiting another month until a full analysis could be made of the extent of any required rise in interest rates in the context of the February Report.
Some of the rise in November can be accounted for by bonuses.
--------8--------
On the balance of arguments set out above, a majority of the MPC voted to leave the repo rate unchanged, with a minority preferring an immediate increase in interest rates.
The MPC considers the most likely profile for sterling is that it depreciates from its starting-point at a rate implied by the difference between the constant UK interest rate assumed in the projection and expected overseas interest rates, reaching an index level of around 101 by the end of the forecast period, which is consistent with a rate of around 1.62 against the dollar and 2.86 against the Deutsche Mark.
The nominal effective exchange rate had risen further since the previous MPC.
In the meantime, if the inflation target is to be met, any further rise in earnings growth would have to be absorbed by lower profits.
At the February MPC meeting, which took place on 4–5 February, the Committee decided to leave the repo rate unchanged at 7.25%.
The projection for inflation is based on the assumption that official interest rates will remain unchanged at 7.25% during the next two years.
The underlying rate of inflation might be well above the inflation target.
Nominal earnings growth has increased, and is currently around the rate implied by the November central projection.
The Government’s ‘New Deal’ for unemployed people is targeted at: people under 25 who have been unemployed for over six months; and people over 25 who have been unemployed for more than two years.
US short-run interest rate expectations for end 1998 and end 1999 have fallen by around 60 basis points since October.
In Germany, short-run interest rate expectations have fallen by around 40 basis points for both end 1998 and end 1999.
The market expectation of short-term interest rates in the G3 at the end of 1998 has fallen by almost 50 basis points during the past three months.
In addition, for the first time, a new projection is presented under the assumption that official interest rates follow market expectations over the next two years.
The falls in interest rates at the short end of the yield curve will already be stimulating activity.
The Committee voted unanimously to leave the Bank’s official dealing rate unchanged.
A third view was that there was little or no presumption that interest rates should rise.
And sterling might not depreciate in line with interest rate differentials as assumed in November.
Mortgage margins have remained broadly unchanged since August.
And annualised shorter-term growth rates have been below the twelve-month growth rate since August.
At one end was the view that interest rates should be raised immediately for four reasons.
The rise in overseas short-term forward interest rates relative to UK rates has been smaller than market expectations in November.
But there remains a risk that the rapid and persistent monetary growth during the past two years will feed through to higher nominal demand and, in turn, into higher wages and prices.
On 4 February, the outcome seen as most likely—shown by the darkest blue band—was a fall in interest rates, with a higher weight being attached to interest rates lying above the central band in 1998.
The quarterly profile of RPIX inflation, particularly during 1998, is affected by changes in Council Tax and indirect taxes.
German interest rates are expected to rise significantly during 1998, and probabilities are skewed above the central band.
By contrast, the implied distribution for US short rates suggests that the outcome seen as most likely by financial markets is an easing of US monetary policy, though probabilities are skewed towards rates above the central band.
The most likely reason for the shift in this trade-off is that the equilibrium, or natural rate, of unemployment is lower now than it was in the 1980s—an assumption which underlies the inflation projection.
So overseas interest rates are expected to rise by less during the year, relative to UK rates, than the MPC thought likely in November (by some 50 basis points).
But a comparison of certain bilateral interest rate differentials points to a more pronounced effect of monetary policy factors: the expected bilateral exchange rate depreciation implied by the difference between UK interest rates and German interest rates has quickened since the November Report.
Official interest rates have been unchanged since the rise in the Bank’s repo rate on 6 November to 7.25%.
But the difference between the rise in a broad measure of the sterling effective exchange rate, which includes these currencies, and the published effective exchange rate index is small—2 percentage points.
At the time of the November Report, the outcome considered most likely by financial markets was that interest rates would increase slightly by the end of 1997 and then fall from early 1998.
Long-term nominal interest rates have fallen by around 50 basis points in the United Kingdom and by around 40 basis points overseas during the same period.
Chart 6.6 shows an alternative projection, based on the assumption that official interest rates follow market expectations.
For the current projection, the MPC has assumed that the most likely scenario is that the exchange rate will depreciate in line with the difference implied by the constant UK interest rate and market expectations of overseas interest rates.
As Chart 1.9 showed, the central market expectation is that UK interest rates will fall to around 7% by the end of 1998 and to below 61/2% by the end of 1999.
The level of the effective exchange rate in two years time implied by the projection is 101.
Chart 6.7 shows the corresponding output projection made under the market interest rate assumption.
The Bank’s repo rate has remained unchanged since the rise in official rates on 6 November.
But since the end of October, the situations in Korea and Indonesia in particular have deteriorated and there have been further falls in their currencies: the South Korean won and Indonesian rupiah have fallen by a further 40% and 60% respectively, while currencies in Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines have fallen by around 20%.
The long run can provide a useful benchmark against which to judge whether the level of earnings growth is consistent with a particular level of domestically generated inflation.
Overseas short-term interest rates are expected to rise less relative to UK rates than the MPC thought in November, probably reflecting the impact of Asian developments since then.
Sterling has risen by around 25% against currencies within the published effective exchange rate index during the same period.
The combination of above-trend growth and falling inflation is unsustainable, and has probably already come to an end.
Chart 1.10 shows implied probability distributions for German and US short-term interest rates.
Chart 1.8 shows that spreads between an unsecured short-term borrowing rate, the London interbank offer rate (Libor), and a proxy for the risk-free rate, the general collateral repo rate, widened during November and December before narrowing again in January.
For these people, the New Deal will begin with a period of counselling, advice and guidance, ‘the Gateway’, which may be enough to help some into work.
They expect inflation to fall to 2.9% by December 1999, but those expectations relate to RPI inflation, which is affected by anticipated changes in interest rates.
In the year to January, sterling had appreciated by 12% against the Deutsche Mark and was roughly stable against the US dollar.
The Bank of England’s official dealing rate—the repo rate—has remained unchanged since the November Report was published, at 7.25%.
Both categories of unemployment fell between July and October 1997 by around 30,000 for the under-25 year olds and 45,000 for the over-25 long-term unemployed.
The December figure may have been distorted by end-year balance sheet adjustments in wholesale money markets—the fall in gilt repo activity at the end of 1997 was less marked than in 1996.
The impact of the scheme on measured unemployment, compared with a situation of unchanged policy, will be affected by three factors.
Against the background of this projection, there is a case for a further rise in interest rates.
Mortgage interest payments have risen more quickly than other prices in the retail price index following the MPC’s decisions to increase the Bank’s repo rate during 1997.
This effect is assumed to outweigh the influence of domestically generated inflation in 1998, so RPIX inflation is projected to fall.
Hence, the expected value of the exchange rate at the end of the forecast period  (the mean of the distribution) is lower, at around 95, than the central case (the mode of the distribution).
The inflation projection assumes that the trend growth in whole-economy productivity is 2% a year, close to its long-run average.
This implies that the nominal effective exchange rate is likely to depreciate more slowly than assumed in the November Report.
Following the rise in the Bank’s repo rate on 6 November to 7.25%, rates were unchanged in December and January.
At its February meeting, the MPC voted to leave interest rates unchanged.
At its meeting on 4–5 February, the MPC decided to leave interest rates unchanged.
Indeed, the balance of risks in the projection implies that it is more likely than not that a modest further rise in interest rates will be necessary at some point to hit the inflation target looking two years or so ahead.
Actual interest rates facing borrowers and lenders differ from official rates.
--------9--------
The response of UK net trade following the adjustment in Asia is likely to be similar to that of other European economies, but smaller than in the United States.
Output is expected to fall in the East Asian countries affected.
To offset this would require an increase in net exports from these countries.
If OFIs’ concern over possible falls in the value of equities lessens and they readjust their portfolios from money towards equities, this portfolio adjustment could bring an upward risk to inflation through the effects of higher asset prices on valuation ratios and wealth.
Weaker domestic demand will mean that their demand for imports will fall; but these countries will also shift resources towards exports, with firms tending to switch away from supplying domestic markets towards those overseas.
But the unwinding of windfall spending, past monetary policy tightening and the tight fiscal stance should help to reduce the inflationary pressures from this source.
Monetary policy is currently being pulled in opposite directions.
But there is a risk of a marked fall in UK equity prices, particularly given their rapid rise in 1997 and the prospective effect on UK profits from the adjustments in Asia.
Taking domestic demand and net exports together, overall output growth has slowed by more than was envisaged in the November projections.
As well as the direct effect of the reduction in Asian countries’ net demand for overseas goods, the sharp movements of exchange rates will also affect the world economy.
The central issue is whether the existing policy stance will slow the economy sufficiently quickly to prevent further upward pressure on earnings growth and retail price inflation.
For example, world primary commodity prices are likely to be affected more than the price of traded services, reflecting the relative importance of the Asian economies in these markets.
Net exports are likely to fall further during coming quarters, particularly with the effects of weaker demand in Asia.
That reflects the strength of domestic demand.
The size of the expected fall in output depends on the extent to which any improvement in net trade offsets the expected fall in domestic demand.
The delay reflects both the strength of UK demand and market uncertainty about the persistence of sterling’s appreciation.
The combination of sharply weakening net trade and slowly declining, but above-trend, domestic demand growth will determine whether capacity constraints ease sufficiently rapidly to reduce inflationary pressures.
This is particularly relevant in Japan, where the restructuring of banks is likely to reduce credit availability not only in Asia but around the rest of the world.
(3) But banks’ reassessments of their exposures cannot be divorced from domestic considerations either.
Assessing the impact of contagion is extremely difficult.
The impact of such reassessments will depend, in part, on how significant their exposures are.
Economic growth in Latin America, for example, is likely to slow in 1998, following increases in interest rates and tighter economic policies.
Asset markets in the United States and Europe could be affected, partly through their direct exposure to Asia and other emerging markets.
The size of these potential effects on world growth may be mitigated to the extent that there is a policy loosening in the industrialised countries.
Another source of contagion could stem from changes in capital flows—especially bank lending.
The probability attached to a large fall increased sharply following problems in Asia.
Net trade is weakening, but domestic demand growth is projected to decline only gradually towards trend.
On the other hand, the delayed demand effect of the rise in the real exchange rate, accompanied by monetary and fiscal tightening, is likely to slow growth sharply over the coming year.
Interest rates were increased sharply in these countries.
A third major channel is the possibility that the problems in Asia might spread to other emerging economies.
Second, the crisis in Asia is likely to depress domestic demand in that region, with significant effects on world trade and output.
Overall, the balance of risks to inflation is on the upside.
Domestic demand growth is expected to fall towards trend.
A large rise in the current account deficit is expected.
Spreads on corporate bonds relative to comparable US treasuries have widened throughout emerging markets, as international investors have reassessed the risks in these countries.
There are two major depressing factors on trade.
The adjustment to net exports will move current account balances towards surplus for the affected Asian countries.
The scale of the slowdown depends, in part, on the behaviour of net trade.
But the fall in real exchange rates represents a major shock in the short run, and will help to boost Asian net exports.
But forecasts of growth in the United States and continental Europe have been revised up, mainly because of recent faster-than-expected growth.
Events in Asia have continued to unfold since these forecasts were finalised, and considerable uncertainties remain.
There were signs of contagion in a number of currency and equity markets in emerging countries in 1997.
(2) And if banks outside the affected Asian economies reassess their existing loan books and change their behaviour towards new business, there could be an impact on credit availability across the world.
The trade deficit with non-EU countries has widened substantially in recent months.
There is also a risk that developments in Asia will have a larger negative impact on world demand, especially in 1998, than implied by the central projection, though there could be a stronger bounce-back in 1999.
A much larger crisis resulting from contagion affecting other countries is possible, but unlikely.
But the uncertainties surrounding these forecasts have increased, and there are downside risks to UK activity and inflation.
It includes domestic commodities, and takes account of the effect of the Common Agricultural Policy on the UK price of agricultural commodities.
The box on pages 14–15 examines three channels through which these events could affect the world economy.
First, the fall in aggregate demand and the rebalancing towards net trade and lower domestic demand in Asia will reduce demand for UK goods and services.
The United Kingdom’s share of trade with Asia is relatively small, and though UK exporters’ competitiveness in third-country markets such as the United States will also be affected, the overall effect is unlikely to be large.
Third, there are risks of problems spreading to other emerging markets and a global consolidation of bank balance sheets, leading to reduced availability of credit.
Problems were initially concentrated in Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand (the ASEAN-4).
The box also emphasises the importance of the monetary policy response in the main industrialised economies in determining the net impact of the events in Asia on the world economy.
The impact of developments in Asia has probably affected short-term interest rate expectations.
This could represent a build-up of additional money-holdings in an attempt to minimise the risk from potential future falls in asset prices.
Following sterling’s exit from the ERM in 1992, export margins widened considerably, and these wider margins were maintained until 1996.
So it is difficult to know whether the recent cuts in export margins are sustainable.
The widening of spreads is likely to have reflected a higher premium required by lenders to issue unsecured loans, following equity market turbulence in October and the emergence of problems in Asia.
The considerations which affect monetary policy are finely balanced.
The effects in the United Kingdom are expected to be similar to those other European countries, though less than in the United States.
As the box on pages 14–15 notes, financial markets expect industrial countries to adjust macroeconomic policy in response to problems in Asia, and this has been reflected in US and German short-term interest rate expectations.
But the uncertainties surrounding these forecasts have increased, and there are downside risks to UK activity and inflation.
Events in Asia provide the main international news since November.
The turmoil in Asia has led to expectations of lower world output growth, and hence demand for oil, in 1998.
Candidates who refuse a place on the scheme may lose benefits.
The training and experience gained as part of the New Deal should reduce the chances of churning, by helping the targeted groups to compete more effectively for jobs.
‘Displacement’ means that the targeted groups will, to some extent, be taking jobs that other potential workers would have taken.
‘Displacement’ and ‘churning’ are the two other factors that could limit the impact of the scheme.
A small part of this difference reflects world inflation.
Chart 1.14 identifies the Bank’s estimate of the contribution made by monetary policy factors to recent changes in the nominal effective exchange rate.
This was possibly because UK demand has been growing more strongly than demand in most continental European economies.
It appears that the effects of the exchange rate appreciation on trade flows are materialising.
So news about overseas and domestic monetary policy has probably played an important role in explaining the recent behaviour of sterling.
The risk of the erratic factors unwinding more quickly than expected is reflected in an upward skew to the inflation projection.
This was the sixth year of economic expansion in the United Kingdom.
The counterparties to this improvement in Asian net trade and current accounts will primarily be North America, Europe and Japan, where net trade will decline.
Increased holdings of other financial assets partly reflect rising UK equity prices.
So the fall in real rates may also reflect shifts in global savings and investment patterns, namely lower expected investment profitability and lower expected aggregate fiscal deficits in industrial countries as a whole.
But there are few reasons to expect sterling’s rise to continue, and it is unlikely that domestic factors alone account for the decline in UK real rates.
A number of factors led to the reduction in price.
There is still a risk that these portfolio effects could unwind rapidly, leading to a faster depreciation than implied by interest rate differentials.
Net exports had held up surprisingly well in the face of the appreciation of sterling, and the expected reduction in output growth had not materialised.
The most likely interpretation was that the impact on net trade had been deferred, and that output growth would be lower in 1998.
There was still uncertainty about the output gap and thus about the rate of demand growth that could be sustained without leading to a rise in inflation.
Another view was that, though those arguments had much force, there was still considerable uncertainty about their implications for future inflation.
The risks from developments in Asia appeared to be on the downside.
The output gap was difficult to measure and did not provide a clear signal to policy.
The strength came mostly from growth in exports with countries outside the European Union (EU) (see Chart 2.3).
Chart 2.4 shows that the downturn in net trade with non-EU countries has been spread fairly evenly across regions.
Domestic demand growth is expected to fall towards trend.
That implies a large rise in the current account deficit.
Overall, net financial wealth has grown more strongly since the end of 1996 than previously thought.
The trade balance with EU countries has been broadly stable in recent months.
That reflected two main factors.
There are now signs that both factors are beginning to materialise.
And since the November Report there have been further developments in Asia, which are likely to lead to a greater slowdown in external trade.
Those estimates reflect both direct and indirect effects, as well as the policy response in other countries.
Uncertainty about the prospects for world trade is greater than usual, and that has been reflected in the projections.
Net private capital inflows to East Asia are expected to fall in 1998, reflecting the increased perceived riskiness of lending to these countries.
The projection takes account of the anticipated monetary policy accommodation in the industrialised world.
The box outlines the three channels through which problems in Asia may affect the world economy, and discusses offsetting policy responses to the shock.
But there is a downside risk arising from uncertainties, particularly over events in Asia.
This may partly reflect supply-side effects induced by increased competition and the arrival of new entrants in the market for unsecured credit.
The exchange rate appreciation could have been passed through, but its effect offset by upward pressure on inflation resulting from the strength of domestic demand.
A much larger crisis resulting from contagion affecting other countries is possible, but unlikely.
The implications of the financial crisis in East Asia were considered.
Asian countries had been an important source of growth in G7 exports in recent years, and it was possible that a slowdown in Asia would, together with sterling’s continuing appreciation, bring about a fall in the United Kingdom’s net exports in 1998—possibly more than expected at the time of the November Report.
Some of the affected countries had implemented major changes of economic policy, and the IMF appeared to have reached agreement with Korea on the conditions for its support.
The situation needed careful monitoring, but at that time the Committee judged that the changing external environment did not of itself require or prevent a change in UK monetary policy.
Overall, the balance of risks to inflation in the projection is on the upside.
In September 1998, the United Kingdom will begin to use the new European System of Accounting, which will record software expenditure as investment.
It is possible that some of the weakening in ICCs’ borrowing has reflected the lower level of take-over activity within the United Kingdom during 1997.
For example, reports from the Bank’s regional Agencies have suggested that IT equipment, because of its short economic life, may have been recorded as current rather than capital expenditure.
In that case, output growth would need to slow sharply to avoid a marked increase in inflation, and policy might need to be tightened soon if there were no clear evidence of a slowdown in the economy.
Another view was that the economy was close to but not clearly above capacity, though still growing above trend.
The apparent weakness in investment may be partly the result of incomplete recording of investment spending.
But domestic demand should slow, given the tightening of monetary and fiscal policy.
The MPC agreed that such uncertainty about where the economy was in relation to capacity made the policy judgment very difficult.
Though the deficit with EU countries has been fairly stable, this may be partly because of strong domestic demand growth in continental Europe.
The MPC discussed the likely impact of Asian turbulence.
Overall, the downside risks seemed to have increased during the past month.
Increased mergers and acquisitions activity, along with share buybacks, could also have played a part.
The implications of the latest projection for the stance of monetary policy are discussed in the Overview at the beginning of the Report.
